Punk Education

Education is anarchopunk as a fifteen-year-old reading Noam Chomsky while she drinks moonshine on a freight train. It's as cyberpunk as Neal Stephenson before he wrote REAMDE. It is more of an equalizer than Brad Pitt blowing up all the credit-tracking buildings in the country and setting us all back to zero.

A slam poet friend said she couldn't be an anarchist, because she has diabetes, and where will the medicine come from?

But edupunk addresses this. It is always wrong to destroy. Never be against anything, always be for something. Everywhere I go, my eyes are blazing. I am more excited for Khan Academy, for Coursera, for Youtube than anything before in my life. It's amazing.

I am smart, and I have the sentence to prove it. "I'm a PhD student in machine learning at UT Austin (ranked #5 in US News and World report for Artificial Intelligence)." The only way I could be smarter would be if I were at Berkeley, MIT, CMU, or Stanford.
 
I went into a psychometrics classroom today and got kicked out because they don't allow auditing in the educational psychology department. But she can see me during her office hours in a week. 

I want to make great things and it's hard. But education is punk rock.

The antiglobalization movement is against everything, and hackers are for everything. And really, being for things is the only way to do it, because humanity is damn near irrepressible.

I'm reading about innovation, and what's great about KA, Courseras &c &c is that they can target non-consumers. People are acting like KAis meant, in its current state, to replace luxury Montessori hands-on math learning techniques, where every while can count educational bronze elephants to their heart's delight. But KA is something else. It's a product for non-consumers and it's meeting needs that have been unfilled by teachers who are absent, unqualified, or uncaring. And now there's this cool new tool, and if student's understanding of the materials that they get just from watching the videos and doing the exercises (which are brilliant, by the way) is superficial, imagine how superficial it would be without these videos and exercises.

Look, I hate lectures, I hate video, I would *much* rather read a blog post. I can't pay attention, they're too slow, and the class discussions are always so stilted. I love learning by doing - whether that means writing, programming, drawing, or solving math problems. I'll learn it when I need it to produce a correct answer - and by thinking through the process I learn more than I would have if I memorized it. But not everyone is like that. This isn't about making it so that everyone has to learn by going down the side of the screen and doing every exercise in the exact way Sal says.

It's PUNK! It's DIY. It's about figuring out how to do things and then doing them, and experimenting with how you learn. Ok, you want to learn how to do the exercises to get the badges, great. You don't even have to watch the videos, you can google, you can ask your friend who's a bit ahead, you can ask a parent, maybe there's even a book you can crack open. But you can now take responsibility for your own education, with live feedback. AWESOME.

Look, I firmly believe that giving more resources to kids is the most important possible thing. Just making the world better and better - and teachers shouldn't be threatened, because the skills these kids are getting will paying you retirement - and ALSO you are just another awesome resource for kids. And teachers are important, and awesome, and necessary, and that doesn't mean the same isn't true of edutech. 

Some people think education can't possibly be punk. That it is just training workers to be fed into this capitalist machine we have, and that schools are just another way of subsidizing corporations by training their workers to be submissive. BULLSHIT! How can we make better institutions, more just economic structures, argue convincingly against IMF interventions, or generally present a convincing alternative without knowing math and being literate? Math is the working of the universe, and literacy is communication with other humans, and both are needed if you want to create a bright new world out of the ashes of the old because if your revolution is based on the idea that we will all be dumpster-diving Trader Joe's, it sort of depends on capitalism to exist, doesn't it? If you believe that you're right, then presumably you should want people to have as many critical thinking skills as possible. And math is actually an important part of this. Science is punk. Science doesn't believe in wisdom or authority or making appeals to someone who knows better, or following rules. Science is about coming up with a new idea, and trying to prove it wrong, and no matter who you are, you can change how everyone thinks of everything. And you need to know math to do this - or to learn it along the way. But you can pick it up however you want, and that's what's so punk!

The key idea is this: EduTech is in large part for new consumers who previously didn't have access to professional-grade education. It's not the best - it's better than nothing. I suspect that it is a strategic mistake on the part of some of these institutions to aggressively make the ultimate goal - integration into schools - clear. But maybe we are already at the point where that's reasonable.

Folk-punk singer Evan Greer has a song the chorus to which is "I want something that's better than this. And I'm not sure exactly what it is but I think that we could build it, if we tried together.









Outline:
The Educator's Dilemna and Khan Academy


EduPunk 




Books I just read: 

The Educators Dilemma

One-World Schoolhouse

How Children Succeed

The Diamond Age

Alone Together

Eating Animals	6				

Statistics in Plain English

In the past month, I've read several books about education and education reform, nearly all of them written in the past several years. I read Sal Khan's One-World Schoolhouse, 
Disrupting Class: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change the Way the World Learns by Clayton Christensen, Curtis W. Johnson and Michael B. Horn, The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson, and 
How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Hidden Power of Character[Hardcover] by Paul Tough. I also read Sherry Turkle's Alone Together.  I have also read dozens of blog posts (particularly notable are those on Hack Education) and news articles about MOOCS and online education.

Conclusions:

Khan Academy and the big MOOCs fit the model from disrupting class by, in large part, targeting non-consumers of education, rather than current consumers. Even for current consumers, the online ed crowd exists primarily as a supplement to existing knowledge, rather than a replacement for in-class education. 



Disrupting education, Khan Academy, and the empowerment of the nonconsumer


The theory of disruptive innovation basically says the following:

There are a lot of big, successful businesses with great products.
These businesses have big, rich customers who use their products.
They respond to the needs of these customers.

Then someone makes a little widget for little people.
Big, rich customers won't use little widgets for little people.
The big widget company isn't paying attention.
But the little widget company 
But there are a lot of little people


The core ideas of the innovator's dilemna are these:



New productsthat start out too crappy for the customers of major corporations eventually overtake the products those corporations produce. This is because they can get better faster, because they are innovative.

These innovations can almost never come from within the company - then you have a company trying to destroy itself.

It's important to find people who are non-consumers of the existing products - the original personal computers would have been useless to people who were using minicomputers. Also, when a new business with a new innovation 

Looking the major providers of free online education we can see how they rank on these axes.

Coursera:

Coursera is doing one thing really well right now - it's generating a ton of content and providing it to the public for free. This means that they can target millions of people who are currently non-consumers of the service (learning about X) that they are providing. Coursera has a course on Equine Nutrition that my horse-loving sister can take, it has a course on Modern Poetry for my grandmother, film for my brother, design for my mother ... literally everyone I kknow is interested in the content of one course offered on Coursera this year. This means that their potential for growth is huge, and I'm sure that their enrollments are very high (numbers are hard to come by). One big problem I see for coursera right now is that the quality of their courses is really suffering as the quantity increases - which is probably inevitable. It's a tradeoff, and they seem to have made a firm decision for quantity. It may well work for them.

All of the higher education MOOCs are to some degree a threat to traditional universities (perhaps a  very, very large degree.) As such, higher-ed MOOCs still under managerial or financial control by a university are threatening to disrupt their boss's bottom line, they are in a tenuous position. Coursera is run by two professors from Stanford. But professors have tenure. EdX, on the other hand, is run by people directly employed by MIT/Harvard, people who can get fired. It's a venture of organizations, not individuals.


EdX:

EdX is the most connected to its parent organizations, and each of its courses retains a strong sense of branding with the original universities. Instead of working with individual professors, edX is an institution and works with institutions. This means that it can't get too powerful - it is a tool of and for universities.

EdX makes relatively high-quality course inlimited numbers. It appears to be attempting to recreate the experience of being in a college classroom for students. Indeed, it has limited the enrollment of at least one of its courses (Copyright) to maintain that sense of intimacy. It seems like rather than creating a new innovation, edX is trying to make itself a key supporting component of the existing university system, integrating seamlessly with the existing consumers and demands of the system.

Udacity:

Udacity is the least connected to a university out of all the higher education MOOCs, and it shows in the class structure. Instead of trying to replicate a college classroom over the internet, its content is targeted towards online learners with constant engaging questions interspersed with minutes of lecture. Udacity seems to be targeting professionals who are currently nonconsumers of education rather than just university students (like EdX). Not being beholden to the university 
Khan Academy probably fits the mold of the Innovators Dilemna most closely. Khan Academy, especially in the beginning, was not nearly good enough to replace traditional classroom instruction. Youtube videos for kids are not a threat to current industries producing for education any more than toycomputers were to minis. But the product keeps getting better and better, complete with excercises and a coaching platform with individual student analytics and gamification. It is now at the point where it can provide services comprable to those of the original service provider, as we see when looking at Khan Academy's flipped classrooms.

system (though Sebastian Thrum is from Stanford) Udacity has no conflict at the core of its business model.

Khan Academy:

Khan Academy has a potential audience of billions of nonconsumers or partial nonconsumers - kids who get limited or no education because of the lack of adults with the ability or motivation to teach them, but might have access to the internet. Kids who do have access to decent instruction also may be nonconsumers of extracurricular tutoring - Khan's videos did not initially address the needs of kids consuming educational content that was as good as it could be for as much time as they needed. Why target them when there are tons of kids crying out for any content?

Khan Academy, unlike most other educational ventures, is not connected to any university or school, and this gives it the ability to innovate in a truly disruptive way. It doesn't have to worry about biting the hand that feeds it or destroying the institution that spawned it. It can focus on  its core mission - bringing education to the world - without the risk of stepping on toes. 








